<h1 class="post-title">Résumé</h1>

## Summary

Complete, experienced data scientist and software engineer with industrial and academic
backgrounds. Select work includes load prediction for energy storage optimization, big
data packages for R, information filtering and social network analysis. More than [5000](http://scholar.google.com/citations?user=uNAgLfwAAAAJ) citations in the
scientific literature.


## Specialties

Software for big data analytics, map-reduce algorithms. Algorithm design and
implementation, data analysis, machine learning. Speaker at professional meetings.

*   [Expert](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/3-540-44581-1_14) knowledge of
    [machine learning](https://twitter.com/goodfellow_ian/status/835681738189754368)
*   [Unrelenting troubleshooter, delights
    users](https://groups.google.com/d/msg/rhadoop/CUHaESXQJ2Y/fyQzMHRkfv0J)
*   [Accomplished API designer, big data
    expert](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/rhadoop/OetxKchYQMM/R-9Zby_zcEMJ)

## Work Experience

#### Data Scientist, Decision Patterns --- 7/2019 -– Present

Projects include the refactor and optimization of large Hadoop ETL and machine learning
jobs for a Fortune 500 client.

#### Senior Data Scientist, Stem Inc. --- 12/2016 -- 2/2018

Design and implementation of probabilistic load prediction algorithms using Spark,
Tensorflow and scikit-learn on proprietary datasets combined with meteorological data.
Contributed to the design of battery storage optimization algorithms.


#### Consultant, Self-employed --- 12/2010 -- 11/2016

Clients include Dataspora, Revolution Analytics and Adatao. Lead developer for the
RHadoop open source project for big data analytics, including creating the
[rmr](https::/github.con/RevolutionAnalytics/rmr2) package and others in addition to
several internal projects. rmr became the de-facto standard for big data analytics in R
and has been downloaded more than 1M times. Technical and instructional documents and
community building through speaking engagements and forum participation.  Presented at
[strata](https://conferences.oreilly.com/strata/strata2012/public/schedule/speaker/96066).
Other projects include text analysis of user interactions for a software developer,
using NLTK and scikit-learn, and a large data integration project with approximate user
identification.

#### Principal, Rightload --- 5/2010 -- 12/2010

Rightload was an experiment in personal and group information filtering. Addressing the
problem of information overload, it leveraged machine learning, web standards and a
minimalistic UI to fit nimbly within the workflow of the information professional that
uses a feed reader for her or his information needs.

#### Senior Software Engineer, hi5 Networks ---  8/2008 -- 9/2009

A/B testing design, implementation and advocacy for a top 20 web site by traffic. User
behavior and user content analysis. Implemented at scale on Hadoop and using
nonparametric statistics in R.

#### Inference Engineer, Quantcast --- 1/2008 -- 7/2008

Develop and implement machine learning approaches to analyze web traffic data in very
high volumes (4TB/day, implemented on Hadoop). Redesigned reach estimation algorithm
that determines ranking for 20 million web sites with proven and significant accuracy
gains.

#### Staff Bioinformatics Engineer, Affymetrix --- 5/2002 -- 12/2007

Led small team of software engineers to design and implement data analysis pipeline for
advanced research group. Developed core algorithms and high performance computing
backend. Took leading or collaborative role in several papers published in high impact
journals, including one describing the highest resolution human transcriptome map to
date, designing and implementing data analysis methods as needed. Named inventor in two
patents. Contributed statistical modules to [APT
software](http://www.affymetrix.com/estore/partners_programs/programs/developer/tools/powertools.affx)
for high volume customers.

#### Bioinformatics Engineer, ThermoFinnigan --- 3/2001 -- 5/2002

Algorithms and systems for the analysis of mass spectrometry data in proteomics
applications.

#### Lecturer, University of California, Davis --- 10/2000 -- 12/2000

Teach Software Engineering/OOP/C++.

#### Post-graduate researcher, International Computer Science Institute --- 10/1999 -- 9/2000

Research on algorithms for computational biology and machine learning

#### Post-graduate researcher, University of California, Davis --- 10/1998 -- 10/1999

Research on algorithms for computational biology (pedigree analysis)

#### Visiting Scientist, Sandia National Laboratories 7/1998 -- 8/1998

Research on algorithms for computational biology (protein folding, QSAR)

## Education

University of Milan, Italy --- PhD in Computer Science --- 11/1993 -- 5/1997

University of Milan, Milan, Italy --- MS degree in Computer Science --- 11/1987 -- 7/1993
